# Statistical Thinking for Informed Decision Making

## Course Information

  Term:                  Spring 2017
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------
  Meeting times:         Tuesdays and Thursdays. 12:00-1:15.
  Room:                  Homewood Campus, Maryland 109
  Office Hours:          TBA
  Instructor:            Leslie Myint
  Contact information:   <lmyint1@jhu.edu>
  Office:                Welch Medical Library, Room 117
  Course credits:        3
  Prerequisites:         Undergraduate biostatistics course or equivalent. Moderate 
                         familiarity with the R statistical software package.

## Course Description

We live in a highly connected world where the amount of information we
are exposed to on a daily basis is staggering. Primary news reports,
articles from content aggregators, and social media postings are
constantly feeding us information, and we must somehow synthesize all of
this information in order to arrive at sensible conclusions. This course
is designed to introduce students to the considerations that researchers
and analysts face when performing the studies that make up the core
content of news reports. In particular, students will take a detailed
look at the complex process of going from scientific question to data
analysis to journal publication to mainstream media reports. Using
readings from news sources and primary research, students will engage in
discussions about the considerations and complications that arise at
each stage. Additionally, students will gain exposure to the
computational aspect of statistics through data analysis and simulation
exercises in the R programming environment.

*Prerequisites:* Undergraduate biostatistics course or equivalent.
Moderate familiarity with the R statistical software package.

## Course Learning Objectives

Upon successfully completing this course, students will be able to:

1.  Critically evaluate reporting on studies in major fields of
    statistics including association studies, surveys, survival
    analysis, longitudinal studies, and high-throughput biology

2.  Understand the logistical and statistical considerations required
    for the design and analysis of such studies

3.  Develop reasonable plans for the design and analysis of such studies

4.  Analyze how such considerations are addressed in original research
    and how this information is conveyed in news reports

5.  Compare the strengths and limitations of particular study designs
    and analysis approaches for answering a research question and for
    making statements about causality

6.  Communicate more effectively about their evaluations of news, both
    orally and through writing

7.  Apply field-specific terminology to convey ideas about such studies
    and their reporting in the news

8.  Clearly communicate informed evaluations about a particular body of
    news

## Resources

There are no required textbooks for this class, but some useful
references for statistical material include:

-   *Fundamentals of Biostatistics*. Bernard Rosner.

-   *Advanced Data Analysis from an Elementary Point of View*.
    Cosma Shalizi.\
    <http://www.stat.cmu.edu/~cshalizi/ADAfaEPoV/>\
    This is a more advanced reference on considerations for applied data
    analysis that presumes knowledge at the level of 550.420
    Introduction to Probability in the Applied Mathematics and
    Statistics department.

-   Online class notes from the Department of Statistics at Penn State
    University\
    <https://onlinecourses.science.psu.edu/statprogram/>\
    These notes are more advanced, but many of the examples are
    high-level and good for illustrating concepts.

Useful resources for learning more about R programming and data analysis
include:

-   CodeSchool's Try R course:\
    <https://www.codeschool.com/courses/try-r>

-   Coursera's R programming course:\
    <https://www.coursera.org/learn/r-programming>

-   DataCamp's R programming course:\
    <https://www.datacamp.com/courses/free-introduction-to-r>

-   Advanced R by Hadley Wickham\
    <http://adv-r.had.co.nz/>

-   A Handbook of Statistical Analyses Using R\
    <https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/HSAUR/>

## Grading

**Class participation - 10%**

Students are expected to participate in class by asking questions, 
answering questions, contributing to discussions, and presenting 
findings from small group work in class. I will be marking each time 
you participate and tallying this information at the end of the 
semester.

**Weekly journal: Synthesis of class topics – 70%**

Students will keep a journal of responses to the required readings, 
lectures, and discussion material. For each module, students will be 
given a document containing required pre-class readings and questions 
to answer before and/or after each class. These questions are intended 
to focus students' attention on the readings and to clearly express 
ideas discussed in class.

Responses will be graded weekly on content, clarity of writing, and
appropriate use of statistics and terminology. A rubric will be 
provided for each week's assignment.

**Final project: News topic synthesis – 20%**

Students will choose a news subject that interests them (preferably
related to public health topics but others may be suitable—see
instructor) and perform a comprehensive review and evaluation of news
reporting on this subject. Requirements for the project include the
following:

1.  Collection of at least ten news articles on the chosen subject and
    three primary research papers cited by or directly related to the
    content of those articles

2.  Summary of content in the news articles and primary research papers

3.  Critical evaluation of the news articles and primary research papers

4.  Proposed data analysis: students should locate where data related to
    the topic can be found, summarize the features of the available
    data, formulate a research question, propose an analysis plan to
    answer that question, and defend this plan. Students do not actually
    have to perform the analysis.

5.  In-class presentation (approximately 10 minutes) on the above
    4 requirements.

## Attendance Policies

Because participation is an important part of the class and a component 
of the final grade, only two free absences are permitted for the 
semester. For any additional absences due to sickness or extenuating 
circumstances, students should provide appropriate documentation.

## Electronics

Laptops will be permitted during class in order to take notes, reference 
the articles being discussed, and to perform in-class exercises with R.

## Schedule

